What is Jenkins?
Jenkins is an open-source continuous integration-continuous delivery and deployment (CI/CD) automation software DevOps tool written in the Java programming language. It is used to implement CI/CD workflows, called pipelines.

Jenkins is a tool for automating software development processes, including building, testing, and deploying code. It is commonly used in a DevOps workflow to integrate and coordinate different stages of the software development lifecycle, such as continuous integration and continuous delivery.

Jenkins achieves Continuous Integration with the help of plugins. Plugins allow the integration of Various DevOps stages. If you want to integrate a particular tool, you need to install the plugins for that tool. For example Git, Maven 2 project, Amazon EC2, HTML publisher etc.

Freestyle project is the simplest and most basic type of job that can be created in Jenkins and it can be used to perform a variety of tasks such as building, testing, and deploying software.

Creating a Jenkins freestyle project involves several steps:
Log in to Jenkins and navigate to the main dashboard

Click on the "New Item" button on the sidebar

Give your project a name, select "Freestyle project" as the job type and click on "OK" button

In the project configuration page, you can specify the source code management, build triggers, build environment, and build steps

In the build step, you can specify the task you want to perform, such as executing shell commands, running scripts, or building with a specific tool

Once you've configured your project, click on the "Save" button to create it

You can now run the project by clicking on the "Build Now" button

Create a freestyle pipeline to print "Hello World!!
Steps for creating freestyle project:

Install Jenkins on AWS EC2 Ubuntu instance.

For Jenkins used port 8080, browse instance-public-IP/8080 it will open Jenkins dashboard.

Log in to Jenkins and navigate to the main dashboard

Click on the "New Item" button on the sidebar



Give your project a name, select "Freestyle project" as the job type and click on "OK" button



In the project configuration page, you can specify the source code management, build triggers, build environment, and build steps


In the configuration section, scroll down to the "Build" section and add an "Execute shell" build step.


In the build step, you can specify the task you want to perform and enter the command to print "Hello World", such as echo "Hello World!!"


Click on the "Save" button at the bottom of the page to create the project.

Once the project is created, click on the "Build Now" button.



Check the console output for the "Hello World" message.



Successfully created our first Jenkins Project.
